Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,
Pass through the host , and command the people, saying, Prepare you victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan , to go in to possess the land, which the LORD your God giveth you to possess it.
And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh , spake Joshua , saying,
Remember the word which Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, saying, The LORD your God hath given you rest, and hath given you this land.
Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle , shall remain in the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan ; but ye shall pass before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help them;
Until the LORD have given your brethren rest, as he hath given you, and they also have possessed the land which the LORD your God giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the LORD's servant gave you on this side Jordan toward the sunrising.

And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites , and the Hittites , and the Hivites , and the Perizzites , and the Girgashites, and the Amorites , and the Jebusites .
Behold, the ark of the covenant of the LORD of all the earth passeth over before you into Jordan .
Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel , out of every tribe a man.
And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the LORD of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan , that the waters of Jordan shall be cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand upon an heap .
And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over Jordan , and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people;
And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan , and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest ,)
That the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam , that is beside Zaretan : and those that came down toward the sea of the plain , even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed over right against Jericho .
And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan , and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over Jordan .

And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over Jordan , that the LORD spake unto Joshua , saying,
Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,
And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan , out of the place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where ye shall lodge this night.
Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of Israel , out of every tribe a man:

And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave , and set men by it for to keep them:
And stay ye not, but pursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter into their cities: for the LORD your God hath delivered them into your hand.
And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into fenced cities.
And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel .
Then said Joshua , Open the mouth of the cave , and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave .
And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave , the king of Jerusalem , the king of Hebron , the king of Jarmuth , the king of Lachish , and the king of Eglon .
And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua , that Joshua called for all the men of Israel , and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them.

And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of good courage: for thus shall the LORD do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.
And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.
And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun , that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in the cave's mouth, which remain until this very day.
And that day Joshua took Makkedah , and smote it with the edge of the sword , and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho .
Then Joshua passed from Makkedah , and all Israel with him, unto Libnah , and fought against Libnah :
And the LORD delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel ; and he smote it with the edge of the sword , and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho .
And Joshua passed from Libnah , and all Israel with him, unto Lachish , and encamped against it, and fought against it:
And the LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel , which took it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword , and all the souls that were therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah .
Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish ; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.
And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon , and all Israel with him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it:
And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword , and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish .
And Joshua went up from Eglon , and all Israel with him, unto Hebron ; and they fought against it:
And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword , and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon ; but destroyed it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.
And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir ; and fought against it:
And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword , and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining: as he had done to Hebron , so he did to Debir , and to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah , and to her king .
So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the LORD God of Israel commanded.
And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza , and all the country of Goshen , even unto Gibeon .
And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the LORD God of Israel fought for Israel .
And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal .

And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon , and to the king of Shimron , and to the king of Achshaph ,
And to the kings that were on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth, and in the valley , and in the borders of Dor on the west,
And to the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.
And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.
And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom , to fight against Israel .

And Joshua said unto the children of Israel , How long are ye slack to go to possess the land, which the LORD God of your fathers hath given you?
Give out from among you three men for each tribe : and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they shall come again to me.
And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their coasts on the north.
Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before the LORD our God.
But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the LORD is their inheritance: and Gad , and Reuben , and half the tribe of Manasseh , have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east , which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them.
And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you before the LORD in Shiloh .
And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh .
And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD: and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to their divisions.
And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph .
And their border on the north side was from Jordan ; and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward ; and the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Bethaven.
And the border went over from thence toward Luz , to the side of Luz , which is Bethel , southward; and the border descended to Atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Bethhoron.
And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea southward, from the hill that lieth before Bethhoron southward; and the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbaal, which is Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of Judah : this was the west quarter.
And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim, and the border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah :
And the border came down to the end of the mountain that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom , and which is in the valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of Hinnom , to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel,
And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth , which is over against the going up of Adummim , and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben ,
And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward , and went down unto Arabah :
And the border passed along to the side of Bethhoglah northward : and the outgoings of the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan : this was the south coast.
And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the children of Benjamin , by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.
Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho , and Bethhoglah, and the valley of Keziz ,
And Betharabah, and Zemaraim , and Bethel ,
And Avim , and Pharah, and Ophrah ,
And Chepharhaammonai, and Ophni , and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages :
Gibeon , and Ramah , and Beeroth ,
And Mizpeh, and Chephirah , and Mozah ,
And Rekem , and Irpeel, and Taralah,
And Zelah , Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem , Gibeath, and Kirjath ; fourteen cities with their villages . This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.

And the second lot came forth to Simeon , even for the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah .
And they had in their inheritance Beersheba , and Sheba , and Moladah ,
And Hazarshual, and Balah , and Azem,
And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah ,
And Ziklag , and Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusah,
And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages :
Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages :
And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.
Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon : for the part of the children of Judah was too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance within the inheritance of them.
And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:
And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah , and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before Jokneam ;
And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath , and goeth up to Japhia ,
And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah ;
And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel:
And Kattath , and Nahallal , and Shimron , and Idalah , and Bethlehem : twelve cities with their villages .
This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages .
And the fourth lot came out to Issachar , for the children of Issachar according to their families.
And their border was toward Jezreel , and Chesulloth , and Shunem ,
And Haphraim, and Shihon , and Anaharath,
And Rabbith, and Kishion , and Abez ,
And Remeth , and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and Bethpazzez;
And the coast reacheth to Tabor , and Shahazimah, and Bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan : sixteen cities with their villages .
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages .
And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families.
And their border was Helkath , and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph ,
And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal ; and reacheth to Carmel westward , and to Shihorlibnath;
And turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun , and to the valley of Jiphthahel toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel , and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand,
And Hebron , and Rehob , and Hammon , and Kanah , even unto great Zidon ;
And then the coast turneth to Ramah , and to the strong city Tyre ; and the coast turneth to Hosah ; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib :
Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob : twenty and two cities with their villages .
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages .
The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali , even for the children of Naphtali according to their families.
And their coast was from Heleph , from Allon to Zaanannim , and Adami, Nekeb , and Jabneel , unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan :
And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor, and goeth out from thence to Hukkok , and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.
And the fenced cities are Ziddim , Zer, and Hammath , Rakkath , and Chinnereth ,
And Adamah , and Ramah , and Hazor ,
And Kedesh , and Edrei , and Enhazor,
And Iron , and Migdalel, Horem , and Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; nineteen cities with their villages .
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the cities and their villages .
And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families.
And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah , and Eshtaol , and Irshemesh,
And Shaalabbin , and Ajalon , and Jethlah ,
And Elon , and Thimnathah, and Ekron ,
And Eltekeh , and Gibbethon , and Baalath ,
And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon,
And Mejarkon, and Rakkon , with the border before Japho .
And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword , and possessed it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan , after the name of Dan their father.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these cities with their villages .
When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them:
According to the word of the LORD they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnathserah in mount Ephraim : and he built the city, and dwelt therein.
These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest , and Joshua the son of Nun , and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel , divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation . So they made an end of dividing the country.

The LORD also spake unto Joshua , saying,
Speak to the children of Israel , saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses :
That the slayer that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood .
And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.
And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.
And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled.
And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali , and Shechem in mount Ephraim , and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron , in the mountain of Judah .
And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben , and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad , and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh .
These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel , and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood , until he stood before the congregation .

Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest , and unto Joshua the son of Nun , and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel ;

And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel , Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah , the father of Abraham , and the father of Nachor: and they served other gods.
And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood , and led him throughout all the land of Canaan , and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac .
And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau : and I gave unto Esau mount Seir , to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt .
I sent Moses also and Aaron , and I plagued Egypt , according to that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out.
And I brought your fathers out of Egypt : and ye came unto the sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and horsemen unto the Red sea.

And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the LORD which he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye deny your God.
So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.
And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun , the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years old.
And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathserah, which is in mount Ephraim , on the north side of the hill of Gaash .
And Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua , and all the days of the elders that overlived Joshua , and which had known all the works of the LORD, that he had done for Israel .
And the bones of Joseph , which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt , buried they in Shechem , in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver : and it became the inheritance of the children of Joseph .
And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill that pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount Ephraim .

